[page 1]
1 
 
An Act Made to Provide for Management of Pesticides 
 
Preamble: 
 
Whereas, it is expedient to make necessary provisions in relation to 
controlling adverse effects on human, animal and plant health and the 
environment by regulating acts such as production, synthesis, export, 
import, storage, sale, distribution, transportation, use and disposal of 
pesticides; 
Now, therefore, be it enacted by the Federal Parliament. 
Chapter-1 
Preliminary 
1. 
Short title and commencement: (1) This Act may be cited as the 
“Pesticides Management Act, 2076 (2019).” 
 
 
(2) 
It shall commence forthwith. 
2. 
Definitions: Unless the subject or the context otherwise requires in 
this Act,- 
(a) 
“Center” means the Plant Quarantine and Pesticides 
Management Center referred to in Section 14; 
(b) 
“domestic pesticide” means a pesticide made by the 
farmer from natural resources including plants and 
cow’s urine, milk for household and commercial 
purposes;

[page 2]
2 
 
(c) 
"pesticide" means any organic, vegetation, biological 
and chemical material which is used to protect plants, 
agricultural products, forest and forest products, living 
beings, livestock, human health, storage, packaging and 
construction works from any harmful disease, insect, 
mite, nematode, weed grass and rat, and this term also 
indicates the following substance: 
(1) 
substance that reduces the growth of insects 
(harmful living beings) by preying on them, being 
predator, being parasite or causing disease on 
them and pheromone, attractant, repellent and 
deterrent, 
(2) 
insect growth regulator, inhibiter, 
(3) 
plant growth inhibiter, 
(4) 
defoliant,  
(5) 
desiccant, 
(6) 
thinning agent, 
(7) 
agent for preventing problems including the 
premature fall of fruit, 
(8) 
substance in labs related to crops and agro-
products to make disinfection (Disinfectant). 
(d) 
"prescribed" or "as prescribed" means prescribed or as 
prescribed in the Rules framed under this Act;

[page 3]
3 
 
(e) 
"Inspector" means the pesticide inspector appointed pursuant 
to Section 24; 
(f) 
"restricted pesticide" means any pesticide that causes adverse 
effect on human health, animal health and the environment, 
and the production, synthesis, export, registration, sale, 
distribution or use of which is restricted; 
(g) 
"Chief" means the chief of the Centre referred to in Section 
16; 
(h) 
“plant" means the stem, branch, node, graft, bark, root, leaf, 
fruit, flower, seed and germplasm of any living vegetation or 
the vegetation used for transmission of heredity; 
(i) 
"Ministry" means the Ministry of the Government of Nepal 
responsible for agriculture; 
(j) 
"adulterated pesticide" means a pesticide which contains any 
essential active element being more or less, any substance 
added to it to reduce its efficacy or which does not contain 
such quality, quantity or characteristic as specified in the 
specification of pesticides; 
(k) 
"plant substance" means any substance made from the stem, 
branch, node, graft, bark, root, leaf, fruit, flower, seed of 
vegetation, and this term also includes a dead vegetation or 
any part thereof; 
(l) 
"active element" means an element that is biologically or 
chemically active during the synthesis and production of a 
pesticide (pesticide residue);

[page 4]
4 
 
(m) 
"Committee" means the pesticides management committee 
referred to in Section 11; 
(n) 
“notified pesticide" means a pesticide that has been registered 
by the Government of Nepal under this Act and specified by a 
notification in the Nepal Gazette. 
Chapter 2 
Registration of Pesticides 
3. 
Registration of pesticide to be made: (1) Any person, institution or 
body shall register any pesticide and its active element with the 
Centre, prior to making its production, synthesis, export, import, 
commercial use, storage, sale, distribution, transportation, packaging 
or re-packaging. 
 
(2) 
An person, institution or body that wishes to make 
registration pursuant to sub-section (1) shall submit an application, 
accompanied by such details and in such form as prescribed, to the 
Center directly or through the Provincial Ministry responsible for 
agriculture, and the application received by the Provincial Ministry 
responsible for agriculture shall be forwarded to the Centre within 
the prescribed time. 
(3)  
The Centre shall make necessary examination of the 
application received pursuant to sub-section (2), and if the prescribed 
terms are found to have been met, it shall register such pesticide and 
grant the certificate thereof. 
(4)  
The certificate granted pursuant to sub-section (3) shall 
be valid for three years.

[page 5]
5 
 
(5)  
Provisions relating to the fee required for the 
registration of a pesticide and other provisions related thereto shall 
be as prescribed. 
(6)  
The Ministry shall publish the name of the pesticides 
registered pursuant to sub-section (3) in the Nepal Gazette. 
4. 
Prohibition on use of pesticide not registered: (1) No one shall do or 
cause to be done any acts including to produce, synthesize, export, 
import, commercially use, store, sell, distribute, transport, pack or re-
pack any pesticide other than that registered pursuant to sub-section 
(3). 
 
 
(2) 
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), 
nothing shall bar the importing of a pesticide for the purpose of 
scientific use or research, with the prior-approval approval of the 
Centre. 
5. 
Power revoked or suspend registration: The Centre may revoke or 
suspend the registration of a pesticide in any of the following 
circumstances: 
(a) If it does not appear appropriate to keep the registration 
of the pesticide, which has been registered, for the reason 
that it has caused adverse impact on human health, animal 
or plant health and the environment, 
(b) If the use of the pesticide is not effective for the purpose 
for which it was imported and synthesized, 
(c) If the pesticide is used in a wrong way other than for the 
purpose for which it was imported and synthesized,

[page 6]
6 
 
(d) If, subsequent to its registration, any fact is found at the 
national and international levels that the pesticide causes 
negative effect or if any change in the circumstance 
creates such a situation requiring revocation or 
suspension of the registration, 
(e) If it is found that the terms specified at the time of 
registration have been violated, 
(f) If any act is found committed contrary to this Act or the 
Rules, Directives and Standards framed under this Act. 
(2) 
The process relating to the revocation or suspension of 
registration of a pesticide shall be as prescribed. 
6. 
Re-registration of the pesticide: (1) Except for the circumstances 
mentioned in clauses (a), (c), (e) and (f) of sub-section (1) of Section 
5, if it is required to use such pesticide even after the expiry of the 
validity of the registration certificate, the person, institution or body 
having made its registration pursuant to Section 3 shall make an 
application to the Centre for its re-registration. 
(2) 
In the case of a pesticide whose registration has been 
revoked or suspended on the ground referred to in clause (b) of sub-
section (1) of Section 5, if any person, institution or body considers 
that it is appropriate to use the pesticide upon its re-registration on 
the ground that such circumstances does not exist, such person, 
institution or body may make an application to the Centre for re-
registration.

[page 7]
7 
 
(3) 
If upon making necessary examination of the 
application made to the Centre pursuant to sub-section (1) or (2), it 
appears to be appropriate to re-register on such grounds as 
prescribed, the Centre may re-register such pesticide and grant the 
certificate. 
(4) 
The certificate granted pursuant to sub-section (3) shall 
be valid for three years. 
(5) 
The grounds for re-registration of the pesticides, fees to 
be levied therefor and other provisions shall be as prescribed. 
7. 
Renewal of registered pesticide: (1) An application shall be made to 
the Centre for renewal prior to thirty days of the expiry of the time-
limit of the pesticide registered pursuant to Sections 3 and 6. 
(2) 
If, upon examination of the application made pursuant 
to sub-section (1), it seems reasonable, the Centre shall renew the 
registration for another period of three years. 
(3) 
 Other process related to the renewal of pesticides shall 
be as prescribed. 
Chapter-3 
Provision Relating to the License 
8. 
License to be obtained: (1) Any person, institution or body wishing 
to produce, synthesize, export, import, transport, pack or re-pack any 
registered or re-registered pesticide shall obtain the license from the 
Centre prior to doing such act.

[page 8]
8 
 
(2) 
 The Centre shall provide such technical information as 
prescribed prior to granting the license pursuant to sub-section (1). 
(3) 
The validity period of the license granted pursuant to 
sub-section (1) shall be three years. 
(4) 
The concerned licensee shall make an application, along 
with the prescribed fee, to the Centre for the renewal of the license, 
prior to thirty-five days of the expiry of the duration referred to in 
sub-section (3). 
(5) 
A licensee who fails to make an application within the 
period referred to in sub-section (4) may make an application for the 
renewal of the license within fifteen days after the expiry of the 
period referred to in sub-section (3). 
(6) 
The Centre may renew the license for another period of 
three years upon making necessary examination of the application 
made pursuant to sub-section (4) or (5). 
(7) 
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), 
provisions relating to the license for sale, distribution and spraying of 
pesticides, granting of license for sale, distribution of pesticides and 
business of spraying of pesticides, out of the pesticides registered 
pursuant to Section 3 and renewal and revocation thereof shall be as 
provided in the Provincial law of the concerned Province. 
(8) 
The license not renewed pursuant to this Section shall 
be deemed to have been revoked ipso-facto. 
(9) 
The form of the license referred to in sub-section (1), 
the fee and process therefor, qualification of the person, institution or

[page 9]
9 
 
body wishing to obtain the license and other provisions relating to 
the renewal of the license shall be as prescribed. 
9. 
License may be revoked: (1) In case any licensee violates the terms 
specified at the time of granting the license, the Centre may revoke 
such license at any time. 
(2) 
Prior to the revocation of the license pursuant to sub-
section (1), the Centre shall provide the concerned licensee with a 
time-frame of fifteen days and appropriate opportunity to submit the 
reasonable ground, if any, for not revoking the license within that 
time-frame. 
(3) 
If any reason for not revoking the license pursuant to 
sub-section (2) is submitted or no information is received within the 
time-frame, the Centre shall, within fifteen days, make necessary 
decision on the revocation of the license and give information 
thereof to the concerned licensee.  
(4) 
The license shall be deemed to have ipso facto been 
suspended during the period from the commencement of revocation 
of the license pursuant to sub-section (2) till the decision made 
pursuant to sub-section (3). 
10. 
License to be obtained in the Province: (1) A person, institution or 
body wishing to conduct the business of sale, distribution, storing, 
commercial use and spraying of the registered or re-registered 
pesticides shall obtain a license from the Province Pesticides 
Management Committee.

[page 10]
10 
 
(2) 
The provisions on granting the license pursuant to sub-
section (1), renewal and revocation of such license shall be as 
determined by the Provincial law.  
Chapter-4 
Formation and Functions, Duties and Powers of the Committee 
11. 
Pesticides Management Committee: (1) There shall be a Pesticides 
Management Committee in order to provide opinion, suggestion and 
advice to the Government of Nepal on matters including the 
formulation of necessary policy related to the management of 
pesticides.  
(2) 
The Committee shall comprise the following members: 
(a)  Secretary, Ministry 
-Chairperson 
(b)  Joint 
Secretary, 
Ministry 
of 
the 
Government of Nepal responsible for 
environment 
-Member 
(c)  Director 
General, 
Department 
of 
Livestock Services 
-Member 
(d)  Executive Director, Nepal Agricultural 
Research Centre 
-Member 
(e)  Chief, Department of Health Services 
or expert representative, Epidemiology 
and Disease Control Division 
-Member

[page 11]
11 
 
(f)  Five persons including at least two 
women nominated by the Ministry 
from amongst the pesticide experts, 
forest experts, agriculture expert and 
consumer farmers  
-Member 
(g)  One person nominated by the Ministry 
from 
amongst 
the 
pesticide 
entrepreneurs 
-Member 
(h)  Under Secretary (Law), Ministry 
-Member 
(i)  Chief 
-Member-Secretary 
(3) 
The tenure of the members nominated pursuant to 
clauses (f) and (g) of sub-section (2) shall be three years and 
they may be nominated for another tenure. 
(4) 
Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-
section (3), if any member nominated pursuant to clause (f) or 
(g) of sub-section (2) does any act against the interest of the 
Committee, the Ministry may remove him or her prior to the 
completion of his or her tenure. 
Provided that, prior to such removal, a reasonable 
opportunity shall be given to him or her to furnish explanation. 
(5) 
The Committee may, as required, invite an expert 
of the concerned subject to the meeting.

[page 12]
12 
 
12. 
Meeting and decision of the Committee: (1) The Committee shall 
meet at least once in six months. 
(2) 
The meeting of the Committee shall be held at such 
date, time and place as specified by the Chairperson. 
(3) 
The presence of more than fifty percent of the total 
member of members of the Committee shall be considered to 
constitute a quorum for the meeting. 
(4) 
The Chairperson shall preside over the meeting of the 
Committee, and, in his or her absence, by the member selected by the 
members attending the meeting from amongst themselves. 
(5) 
The majority opinion shall prevail at the meeting of the 
Committee, and the in the case of a tie, the Chairperson shall 
exercise the casting vote. 
(6) 
The decision of the Committee shall be authenticated by 
the Chairperson and the member-secretary. 
(7) 
Other procedures relating to the meeting of the 
Committee shall be as prescribed. 
13. 
Functions, duties and powers of the Committee: (1) The functions, 
duties and powers of the Committee, in addition to the functions, 
duties and powers mentioned elsewhere in this Act, shall be as 
follows: 
(a) 
To formulate the policy on pesticides and submit it to 
the Government of Nepal,

[page 13]
13 
 
(b) 
To encourage the private sector to make investment in 
organic, vegetation based and safe chemical pesticides 
industries, 
(c) 
To do, or cause to be done, acts relating to the setting of 
standards of pesticides and management of pesticides, 
(d) 
To give necessary suggestion to the Government of 
Nepal for the ratification and implementation of 
international treaties and agreements on pesticides, 
(e) 
To restrict the pesticides that cause adverse effect on 
human and animal health, health of living creatures and 
the environment, 
(f) 
To hear complaints made against the decisions made by 
the Inspector or the Chief, 
(g) 
To ascertain, or cause to be ascertained, if any substance 
or good is a pesticide or not, 
(h) 
To approve the standards on the management of 
pesticides and enforce, or cause to be enforced, the 
same, 
(i) 
To delegate the power as and when required to the 
Centre and sub-committee, 
(j) 
To perform such other functions as prescribed. 
(2) 
The Committee may, as required, form a sub-committee 
for the carrying out of acts of production, synthesis, import, export,

[page 14]
14 
 
commercial use, storage, sale, distribution, transportation, packaging 
or re-packaging of pesticides easily and smoothly. 
(3) 
The functions, duties, powers and procedures of the sub-
committee to be formed pursuant to sub-section (2) shall be as 
prescribed by the Committee at the time of its formation.   
(4) 
The Committee may delegate some of its powers 
conferred on it by this Act to the Centre, the Provincial Pesticide 
Management Committee referred to in Section 39 or the sub-
committee. 
Chapter 5 
Registration and Management Centre 
14. 
 Provision of the Centre: (1) There shall be a Plant Quarantine and 
Pesticides Management Centre under the Ministry for carrying out 
the functions including the control, regulation, registration and 
management of pesticides. 
(2) 
The Government of Nepal shall make available the 
human resources required for the Centre. 
15. 
Functions, duties and powers of the Centre: The functions, duties and 
powers of the Centre, in addition to the functions, duties and powers 
mentioned elsewhere in this Act, shall be as follows: 
(a) 
To carry out necessary functions as the secretariat of the 
Committee,  
(b) 
To arrange for the registration or re-registration of 
pesticides,

[page 15]
15 
 
(c) 
To specify the process and procedure to be followed for 
the registration of pesticides, 
(d) 
To examine 
the applications received for 
the 
registration, re-registration of pesticides or renewal of 
the registered pesticides, 
(e) 
To issue the certificate upon registration and re-
registration of pesticides and renew the same, 
(f) 
To issue the license for carrying out work relating to 
pesticides and renew the same, 
(g) 
To prepare such infrastructures as prescribed for the use 
of pesticides, 
(h) 
To specify the standards for the equipment required for 
using pesticides, 
(i) 
To carry out such other functions as specified by the 
Committee, 
(j) 
To carry out such other functions as prescribed. 
16. 
Chief: The Ministry may designate a Gazette First Class Officer of 
the Nepal Agriculture Service serving in the field of crops 
conservation to function as the Chief of the Pesticides Registration 
and Management. 
17. 
Functions, duties and powers of the Chief: (1) The functions, duties 
and powers of the Chief, in addition to the functions, duties and 
powers mentioned elsewhere in the Act, shall be as follows:  
(a) 
To function as the Chief of the Centre,

[page 16]
16 
 
(b) 
To monitor and examine, or cause to be monitored and 
examined, whether the quality of pesticides is in 
conformity with the specified standards or not, and to 
take action if it is found to be contrary to the standards, 
(c) 
To carry out, or cause to be carried out, functions 
relating to the registration and management of 
pesticides, 
(d) 
To prepare an annual report on the functions performed 
by the Centre and submit it to the Committee, 
(e) 
To carry out, or cause to be carried out, such other 
functions as specified by the Committee, 
(f) 
To carry out such other functions as prescribed. 
(2) 
The Chief may, as required, delegate the powers vested 
in him or her to any subordinate officer employee. 
Chapter-6 
Use and Management of Pesticides 
18. 
Use of pesticides: (1) No person shall use any pesticide haphazardly 
and produce, sell and distribute it in a manner that the residue of 
such pesticide exceeds the specified level. 
(2) 
No one shall sell, distribute, store and use, or cause to 
be sold, distributed, stored and used, any pesticide knowingly that 
the pesticide is adulterated or of low quality.

[page 17]
17 
 
(3) 
Any person or institution that sells or distributes 
pesticides shall put on sale safe pesticides and also safe attire to be 
worn while using and disposing the pesticides. 
(4) 
Such necessary preventive measures as prescribed shall 
be adopted while making production, synthesis, import, export, 
commercial use, storage, sale, distribution, transportation or disposal 
of pesticides. 
(5) 
The pesticides and foods shall be stored in and sold 
from different places. 
(6) 
A pesticide shall be used only for the purpose for which 
it has been registered under this Act. 
(7) 
A pesticide shall be used, or caused to be used, only 
after getting the container of that pesticide and leaflet written in 
Nepali and the form of prescription approved by the Center prior to 
the import and synthesis of such pesticide.  
(8) 
Other provisions relating to the use of pesticides shall 
be as prescribed. 
19. 
Use of domestic pesticides: The production and distribution of 
domestic pesticides shall be made in an environment friendly 
manner, in accordance with this Act. The standards required for the 
registration, production, storage, transportation, sale and distribution 
of that pesticides shall be as prescribed. 
20. 
Production and use of vegetation based and organic pesticides to be 
encouraged: The Ministry shall encourage the production and use of

[page 18]
18 
 
vegetation based and organic pesticides for managing different 
diseases or insects infecting crops, plants, house and storage 
21. 
 Production and synthesis of pesticides: (1) The production and 
synthesis of pesticides shall be made in such a manner that they are 
human and animal health and environment friendly.  
(2) 
Provisions relating to the production and synthesis of 
pesticides shall be as prescribed. 
22. 
Use of pesticides to be restricted: (1) The Committee may, on the 
recommendation of the Centre, impose restriction on the production, 
synthesis, import, export, commercial use, storage, sale, distribution 
and transportation of the pesticides that cause adverse impact on 
human and animal health and the environment. 
(2) 
The Ministry shall publish a notice relating to the name 
of the pesticides restricted pursuant to sub-section (1) in the Nepal 
Gazette. 
(3) 
Other provisions on imposing restriction on the use of 
pesticides shall be as prescribed. 
23. 
Management of the expired pesticides: (1) If the date of any pesticide 
imported by any importer expires, the importer shall make proper 
management of that pesticide at his or her own cost. 
Provided that in the case of any pesticide produced, 
synthesized, imported, exported, commercially used, stored, sold 
distributed, transported, packed or re-packed, the concerned 
company or industry shall manage that pesticide properly in advance 
of one month of the expiry of the date mentioned in that pesticide.

[page 19]
19 
 
(2) 
Any person, institution or body, businessperson or 
entrepreneur shall, in making transaction on pesticides, manage the 
expired pesticides on his or her own, subject to the standards as 
prescribed. 
(3) 
In making management pursuant to sub-section (2), the 
concerned pesticide company, industry and person shall make 
provision for withdrawing through the importer the expired 
restricted, broken or leaking pesticides. The Government of Nepal 
shall make necessary arrangements for storing such pesticides for the 
time being. 
(4) 
The standards and procedures relating to withdrawal 
and storage of pesticides pursuant to sub-section (3) shall be as 
prescribed. 
24. 
Inspector to be appointed: (1) The Ministry may, as required, appoint 
a gazette third class employee of the Nepal Agriculture Service who 
has obtained bachelor or equivalent degree in agriculture science and 
is serving in the field of crop conservation as the pesticide inspector 
for performing functions relating to the use and management of 
pesticides.   
(2) 
The Provincial Government may, as required, appoint 
an officer level employee who has obtained bachelor or equivalent 
degree in agriculture science and is serving in the field of crop 
conservation, agriculture service as the pesticide inspector for 
performing functions relating to the use and management of 
pesticides.

[page 20]
20 
 
(3) 
The concerned Province shall give information of the 
appointment of the inspector pursuant to sub-section (2) to the 
Ministry. 
25. 
Functions, duties and powers of the Inspector: (1) The functions, 
duties and powers of the Inspector, in addition to the functions, 
duties and powers mentioned elsewhere in this Act, shall be as 
follows:  
(a) 
To monitor the compliance with this Act and the Rules 
framed under this Act and make recommendation to the 
Committee, 
(b) To enter the place where any pesticide is produced, 
synthesized, imported, exported, commercially used, 
stored, sold, distributed, transported, packed, re-packed 
or advertised and make periodic or casual inspection, 
and make recommendation to the Committee, 
(c) 
To withhold the sale and distribution of such pesticide 
or seal the place of its distribution if any adulterated 
pesticide or pesticide of low quality is found in the 
course of monitoring, 
(d)  To study and analyze documents and evidences 
including the certificate, license, records related to 
pesticides held by any person, institution or body, 
(e) 
To collect and analyze, or cause to be collected or 
analyzed, the sample of a pesticide and crops following 
such process as prescribed,

[page 21]
21 
 
(f) 
To investigate. or cause to be investigated, into the 
matter if there is any suspicion about the violation of 
this Act or the Rule framed under this Act and submit a 
report thereon to the Centre, 
(g) If, upon investigation pursuant to clause (f), it is found 
that this Act and the Rules framed under this Act have 
been violated, to seize the equipment used in such act, 
the pesticide, record, document or other related material 
and give a receipt of seizure to the concerned violator, 
(h) To make arrangements for safely storing the pesticides 
seized pursuant to clause (g), 
(i) 
To carry out such other functions as prescribed. 
(2) 
The Inspector appointed pursuant to sub-section (1) of 
Section 24 shall submit a quarterly report of the functions performed 
by him or her to the Centre, and the Inspector appointed pursuant to 
sub-section (2) of Section 24 shall submit a report of the functions 
performed by him or her to the Provincial Ministry responsible for 
agriculture. 
26. 
Samples to be collected: (1) The Centre shall collect samples for 
examining the quality of pesticides. 
(2) 
Other provisions on the collection and analysis of the 
samples of pesticides shall be as prescribed. 
27. 
Establishment of laboratory: (1) The Ministry may establish a 
pesticide laboratory for carrying out acts including examination of 
the quality of pesticides and research work.

[page 22]
22 
 
(2) 
The Provincial Government may establish a pesticide 
laboratory in congruent with the standards specified by the Ministry.  
(3) 
Until the laboratories referred to in sub-sections (1) and 
(2) are established, the Ministry may designate any recognized 
laboratory which is currently in operation with the investment of the 
Government of Nepal or in operation upon being established at the 
private sector to act as the laboratory referred to in sub-sections (1) 
and (2). 
28. Prohibition on advertisement of unregistered and restricted 
pesticides: No person, institution or body shall mention wrong and 
misleading contents about any unregistered and restricted pesticides 
and advertise with the intention of deceiving and creating confusion 
with any other pesticides. 
29. Disposal of pesticides: (1) The disposal of pesticides shall be made 
in such a manner that it does not cause adverse effect on the health of 
human beings, livestock, aquatics, plants and on the environment. 
(2) 
While destroying pesticides, pesticide wastes and their 
containers, they shall be disposed separately according to the nature 
of that goods.  
(3) 
The manner of and standards for destroying pesticides 
pursuant to sub-section (1) shall be as prescribed by the Committee. 
30. 
Records to be maintained: (1) The person, institution or body 
producing, synthesizing, importing, exporting, commercially using, 
storing, selling, distributing, transporting and disposing pesticides 
shall properly maintain the records containing, inter alia, the

[page 23]
23 
 
quantity, price and other prescribed details of the pesticides 
transacted by such person, institution or body. 
 
 
(2) 
 The records of transaction maintained pursuant to sub-
section (1) shall be provided immediately, if so demanded by the 
Inspector, Chief or Centre.  
(3) 
Other provisions on maintaining records of pesticides 
shall be as prescribed. 
31. 
Code of conduct may be formulated: (1) The Centre may, with the 
approval of the Committee, formulate and enforce a code of conduct 
to be observed by the person, institution or body involved in the acts 
of producing, synthesizing, exporting, importing, transporting, 
packing, re-packing of pesticides. 
(2) 
The Provincial Government may, in consonance with 
the code of conduct formulated pursuant to sub-section (1), 
formulate a code of conduct to be observed by those who sell, 
distribute, store, commercially use pesticides and who are 
wholesalers and retailers of pesticides within the Province. 
Chapter-7 
Offence, Punishment and Compensation 
32. 
Offence deemed to have been committed: Any person who does, or 
causes to be done, any of the following acts shall be deemed to have 
committed the offence under this Act: 
(a) 
To produce, synthesize, import, export, commercially 
use, store, sell, distribute, transport, pack, re-pack or

[page 24]
24 
 
dispose any unregistered pesticide, contrary to Section 
4, 
(b) 
To carry on transaction on pesticides without obtaining 
the license, contrary to Section 8, 
(c) 
To produce, sell and distribute any pesticide with the 
pesticide residue level exceeding the prescribed level or 
sell and distribute any adulterated pesticide, contrary to 
Section 18, 
(d) 
To haphazardly use any pesticide or use any adulterated 
pesticide, contrary to Section 18, 
(e) 
To do, or cause to be done, any act contrary to the 
prevailing standards related to the production, synthesis, 
import, 
export, 
commercial 
use, 
storage, 
sale, 
distribution, transportation, packaging, re-packaging or 
disposal of any pesticide, contrary to Section 22, 
(f) 
To sell any expired pesticide without managing it, 
contrary to Section 23, 
(g) 
To do any act contrary to Sections 28, 29 or 30, 
(h) 
To use or transact any pesticide that fails to conform to 
the standards or any duplicate or counterfeit pesticide, 
(i) 
To make obstruction to the management of pesticides, 
(j) 
To so use a pesticide as to cause environmental 
pollution,

[page 25]
25 
 
(k) 
To do, or cause to be done, any other act contrary to this 
Act or the Rules and standards framed under this Act. 
33. 
Punishment: The commission of any offence referred to in Section 
32 shall be liable to the following punishment: 
(a) 
In the case of the commission of any offence referred to 
in clause (a), punishment of a fine of fifty thousand to 
one hundred thousand rupees or imprisonment for a 
term not exceeding three months or both, 
(b) 
In the case of the commission of any offence referred to 
in clause (b), punishment of a fine of ten thousand to 
twenty thousand rupees or imprisonment for a term not 
exceeding one month or both, 
(c) 
In the case of the commission of the offence referred to 
in clause (c), punishment of a fine of fifty thousand to 
one hundred thousand rupees or imprisonment for a 
term not exceeding three months or both, 
(d) 
In the case of the commission of the offence referred to 
in clause (d), punishment of a fine of five thousand to 
twenty thousand rupees, 
(e) 
In the case of the commission of the offence referred to 
in clause (e), punishment of a fine of fifty thousand to 
two hundred thousand rupees or imprisonment for a 
term from one month to one year or both, 
(f) 
In the case of the commission of any offence referred to 
in clauses (f), (g), (h), (i), (j) and (k), punishment of a

[page 26]
26 
 
fine of five thousand to twenty thousand rupees or 
imprisonment for a term not exceeding one month or 
both. 
34. 
Investigation into and filing of case: (1) The Inspector referred to in 
sub-section (1) of Section 24 shall investigate and inquire into the 
case referred to in this Act. 
(2) 
Upon completion of the investigation and inquiry 
pursuant to sub-section (1), the Inspector shall seek the opinion of 
the Government Attorney and, if decided to institute the case, file the 
case in the concerned District Court. 
35. 
Provision relating to compensation: If any accident takes place in the 
course of production, import, export, synthesis, adulteration, 
transportation, sale, distribution, storage or disposal of any pesticide, 
the concerned licensee person, institution or body shall provide the 
victim with such compensation as prescribed. 
Provided that no compensation shall be provided in cases 
where any damage is resulted from the commission of any act 
considered to be the offence referred to in Section 32. 
36. 
Seizure: (1)  If punishment is imposed pursuant to Section 33, the 
pesticide produced, synthesized, imported, exported, commercially 
used, stored, sold, distributed, transported, packed or re-packed shall 
also be seized. 
(2) 
The concerned owner of the pesticide seized by the 
Inspector pursuant to sub-section (1) shall bear the expenses incurred

[page 27]
27 
 
in the safe storage and disposal of such pesticide pending the final 
settlement of the case. 
37. 
Government of Nepal to be plaintiff: The Government of Nepal shall 
be the plaintiff in the case under this Act. 
38. 
Appeal may be made: (1) A party who is not satisfied with any 
decision made by the Inspector or the Chief may make an appeal to 
the Committee within thirty-five days of the date of such decision. 
(2) 
A party who is not satisfied with the decision made by 
the District Court in a case related to the offence under this Act may 
make an appeal to the concerned High Court within thirty-five days. 
Chapter-8 
Miscellaneous 
39. 
Provincial pesticides management committee: (1) A Provincial 
pesticides management committee shall be formed in each Province 
in order to carry out functions related to pesticides including to grant 
the license to the entrepreneurs who carry on business of sale, 
distribution, storage, commercial use and spraying of pesticides, to 
renew the license, and monitor such acts, and to cause the 
compliance with the standards specified by the Ministry.  
(2) 
The committee referred to in sub-section (1) shall be 
formed in accordance with the Provincial law. 
40. 
Provision relating to monitoring: (1) The Centre shall be responsible 
for the monitoring of all activities related to pesticides.

[page 28]
28 
 
(2) 
The Provincial pesticides management committee shall 
monitor the activities related to pesticides in the Province and submit 
a report to the Provincial Ministry responsible for agriculture and to 
the Committee. 
Provided that where the Provincial pesticides management 
committee has not been formed, the Committee may designate the 
concerned authority or officer to carry out monitoring and submit the 
report. 
41. 
Assistance to be provided: (1) The Inspector may ask the local 
administration for any assistance including security if such assistance 
is necessary in the course of carrying out his or her duties. 
(2) 
If any assistance is asked for by the Inspector pursuant 
to sub-section (1), it shall be the duty of the concerned local 
administration to provide such assistance. 
42. 
Storage home to be made: The Government of Nepal shall make a 
storage home for storing the pesticides seized in each Province and 
for safely keeping the pesticides of such nature that cannot be used 
for various reasons until their safe disposal. 
43. 
Power to launch special programme: The Government of Nepal may 
launch a special programme as an alternative so as to mitigate the 
possible effects caused from the use of chemical pesticides on the 
environment and health of human beings, birds, animals, aquatics, 
plants.  
44. 
Power to frame Rules: The Government of Nepal may frame 
necessary Rules for the implementation of this Act.

[page 29]
29 
 
45. 
Directives, Procedures and Standards may be made: The Ministry 
may, for the effective implementation of this Act, make necessary 
Directives, Procedures and Standards, subject to this Act or the Rules 
framed under this Act. 
46. 
Repeal and saving: (1) The Pesticides Act, 2048 (1991) is hereby 
repealed. 
(2) 
Any acts and actions performed under the Pesticides 
Act, 2048 (1991) shall be deemed to have been performed under this 
Act.