[page 1]
www.lawcommission.gov.np 
www.lawcommission.gov.np 
1
Pesticide Rules, 2050 (1994) 
Date of Publication in Nepal Gazette  
2050.10.25 (7 Feb. 1994)  
 
In exercise of the powers conferred by Section 18 of the Pesticides Act, 2048 (1991), 
Government of Nepal has framed the following Rules.  
Chapter- 1  
Preliminary 
1. 
Short title and commencement: (1) These rules may be called the “Pesticide 
Rules, 2050 (1994)."  
(2) These Rules shall come into force on such date as the Act has come into 
force.
 1
 
 2. 
Definitions: Unless the subject or the context otherwise requires, in these Rules:  
(a)  
"Act" means the Pesticides Act, 2048 (1991). 
(b)  
"Office" means the office established by Government of Nepal. 
(c) 
"Container" means a utensil or box or pouch to be used to contain, cover, 
seal, include or pack the pesticides.  
(d) 
"Label" means information related to the pesticides written, printed or 
drawn by line on the pesticides or on the container containing the pesticides 
or on the outer part of the container or on the pouch of the pesticides. 
(e) 
"Inspector" means the Pesticides Inspector appointed pursuant to section 13 
of the Act.  
3. 
Application for registration of pesticides:  (1) A person, organization or body 
who intends to import, export or produce the pesticides shall, prior to the carrying 
out of such act, make an application to the office in such format as prescribed by 
                                                            
  Vide the Notification published in the Nepal Gazette Section 43, No. 42, dated 2055.10.25 (7 February 1994), 
the Pesticides Act came into force all over Nepal on 2050.10.25 (16 July 1994).

[page 2]
www.lawcommission.gov.np 
www.lawcommission.gov.np 
2
the Committee, along with the registration fee of Fifty Rupees, to get such 
pesticides registered pursuant to Section 9 of the Act.  
(2) The person, organization or body making an application to get the 
pesticides registered pursuant to Sub-rule (1) shall furnish such necessary 
technical and other information related with the pesticides as required by the office 
in connection with the registration.  
4. 
Registration of pesticides: (1) If an application is made to get the pesticides 
registered pursuant to Rule 3, the office shall, after making necessary enquiry into 
the matter, and taking into consideration the effect to be caused from such 
pesticides to the human beings, animals, birds and environment, register the 
pesticides with or without imposing any terms and conditions and issue the 
Pesticides Registration Certificate to the applicant, in such a format as prescribed 
by the Committee.  
(2) The Pesticides Registration Certificate given pursuant to Sub-rule (1) 
shall remain valid for a period of Five years. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in Sub-rule (1), the office shall not 
register the pesticides unless and until it receives such data related with the 
pesticides as required by it from the applicant in regard to the registration of such 
pesticides.  
5. 
Powers to refuse to register pesticides: (1) If an applicant making application for 
the registration of any pesticides fails to prove the utility of such pesticides in 
Nepal or if the office is of opinion that the use of such pesticides is likely to cause 
adverse effects on the human beings, animals, birds or environment, the office 
may, by assigning the reasons therefor, refuse to register such pesticides.  
(2) If the office refuses to register any pesticides pursuant to sub-rule (1), a 
notice, accompanied with the reason therefor, shall be given to the applicant.  
(3) The applicant who receives the notice pursuant to Sub-rule (2) may file 
a petition in writing with the Committee to have such decision reviewed; and a 
decision made by the Committee in regard to such petition shall be final.

[page 3]
www.lawcommission.gov.np 
www.lawcommission.gov.np 
3
6. 
Cancellation or suspension of pesticides registration: If the committee is of 
opinion that the continual use of the pesticides registered pursuant to rule 4 is 
proved ineffective or even the general use of such pesticides is likely to cause 
adverse effects on the human beings or animals or birds or environment, the 
committee may, at any time, cancel the registration of such pesticides or suspend 
the registration for any specific period of time. A notice of such cancellation or 
suspension shall be published in the Nepal Gazette.  
7. 
Submission of pesticides imports details: (1) Every person, organization or body 
having obtained the license to import the pesticides shall submit to the office the 
particulars of the pesticides imported within a fiscal year, describing the quantity 
and value thereof in such format as prescribed by the committee within three 
months after the expiry of each fiscal year or prior to that time if so required by 
the committee.  
(2) If the importer fails to submit the import details pursuant to Sub-rule 
(1), the committee may, on recommendation of the office, cancel the registration 
of such pesticides.  
8. 
Approval of container and label: (1) Any person, organization or body intending 
to sell and distribute any pesticides shall submit an application to the office in such 
format as prescribed by the committee, along with the sample of the container and 
the label, to obtain approval of such container and label.  
(2) If an application is submitted pursuant to Sub-rule (1), the office shall 
approve the container and the label, after conforming whether the container 
conforms to the standards fixed by the committee and whether the label contains 
all the information required to be contained in it or not.  
9. 
Prohibition on sale and distribution:  (1) No pesticides imported for the purpose 
of scientific use or research shall be sold or distributed.  
(2) No pesticides shall be sold or distributed without keeping it in such 
container as may be approved by the office.  
(3) No pesticides shall be sold or distributed without keeping it in a

[page 4]
www.lawcommission.gov.np 
www.lawcommission.gov.np 
4
container to which a label approved by the office is not affixed.  
10. 
License to be obtained: Any person, organization or body who intends to carry 
on a business of sale, synthesization or spray of pesticides shall obtain a license 
from the Committee.  
11. 
Application for license: Any person, organization or body who intends to 
obtain the license pursuant to Rule 10 shall make an application, accompanied 
by the license fee of Fifty Rupees, to the committee in such format as may be 
prescribed by the committee.  
12. 
License to retailer of pesticides: (1) If any person, organization or body makes 
an application to the committee pursuant to Rule 11 to obtain a license to carry on 
retail sale of pesticides, the committee shall, subject to the standards fixed in 
respect of the knowledge about the pesticides and uses thereof, make necessary 
inquiry into the matter; and the committee may, if it considers reasonable to issue 
the license, issue the retail seller license in the format as prescribed by it.  
 (2) The retail seller of pesticides shall observe the terms and conditions 
mentioned in the license.  
13. 
License to pesticides spray entrepreneur: (1) If any person, organization or 
body makes an application to the committee pursuant to Rule 11 to obtain a 
license to spray the pesticides commercially, the committee shall, subject to the 
standards fixed in respect of the uses of pesticides, make necessary inquiry into the 
matter; and the committee may, if it considers reasonable to issue the license, issue 
the pesticides spray license in the format as prescribed by it. 
 (2) The pesticides spray entrepreneur shall observe the terms and 
conditions mentioned in the license.  
14. 
License to pesticides synthesizer: (1) If any person, organization or body makes 
an application to the committee pursuant to Rule 11 to obtain a license to 
synthesize the pesticides, the committee shall, subject to the standards fixed in 
respect of the synthesization of the pesticides, make necessary inquiry into the 
matter; and the committee may, if it considers reasonable to issue the license, issue

[page 5]
www.lawcommission.gov.np 
www.lawcommission.gov.np 
5
the pesticides synthesization license in the format as prescribed by it. 
 (2) The pesticides synthesizer shall observe the terms and conditions 
mentioned in the license.  
15. 
Validity period and renewal of license: The validity period of the license issued 
pursuant to Rules 12, 13 or 14 shall be two years.  
 (2) No later than 35 days after the expiration of the validity period of the 
license as referred to in Sub-rule (1), the license shall be got renewed by making 
an application, accompanied by the renewal fee equal to the license fee. If the 
license is not got so renewed, it shall ipso facto be void.  
16. 
Powers to cancel license: If the person, organization or body licensed pursuant to 
Rules 12, 13 or 14 appears to have failed to observe the terms required to be 
observed by such person, organization or body, the Committee may cancel the 
license obtained by such person, organization or body.  
17. 
Issuance of identity card to pesticides inspector: (1) Government of Nepal shall 
issue employee identity cards to the Pesticides Inspectors appointed pursuant to 
section 13 of the Act for their identification.  
(2) If any one wants to see the identity card of the Pesticides Inspector 
while the Pesticides Inspector is performing his duties or exercising his/her powers 
pursuant to the Act and these Rules, he/she shall show the employee identity card 
obtained by him pursuant to Sub-rule (1).  
18. 
Powers, functions and duties of inspector:  (1) The inspector may, in course of 
performing his/her duties, enter into any building, land, vehicle, aircraft, factory, 
commercial centre, storage, shed etc. at any time and may examine or inspect any 
documents or records.  
(2) If any one sells or imports the pesticides in contravention of the 
provisions of the Act and these Rules, the inspector may take such pesticides in 
his/her custody.

[page 6]
www.lawcommission.gov.np 
www.lawcommission.gov.np 
6
19. 
Functions, duties and powers of and procedures of meeting of Subcommittee:  
(1) The functions, duties and powers of the Sub-committees formed under Sub-
section (1) of Section 6 of the Act shall be as follows:  
(a) 
To provide necessary advice to the committee to smoothly 
carry out the importation, exportation, production, sale and 
distribution of the pesticides.  
(b) 
To carry out such other functions as may be specified by the 
committee to smoothly carry out the importation, exportation, 
production, sale and distribution of the pesticides.  
(2) The procedures relating to the meetings of the Sub-committees shall be 
as prescribed by the Committee.  
20. 
Powers to frame and issue manual: In order to effectively implement the Act 
and these Rules, the committee may, as per necessity, frame and issue a Manual in 
regard to the matters related with the pesticides; and it shall be the duty of all the 
concerned to observe the Manual so issued.